2. The concept of _ressentiment_ evokes its English counterpart, ‘resentment’. But what is resentment? Resentment is widely considered to be what Strawson (1961) calls a “reactive attitude” to the actions of others. But it is a special variety of reactive attitude: it is a “_personal_ reactive attitude,” insofar as it is a response to the actions of others when they concern one personally (because they affect one directly, or someone within one’s ‘circle of concern’).

Your essay should complete the following three main tasks:

-   First, you should offer a brief characterization of the sense in which resentment is a “reactive attitude.” This should include a description of the reaction itself, and the identification of the conditions that must be met for an action by others to elicit it.
-   Second, you should attempt to circumscribe the _personal_ character of resentment, focusing on the importance that taking the demeaning treatment personally has in it. (It is helpful, in this regard, to compare and contrast resentment with indignation, the response one has to demeaning treatment when one does not take it personally. The crucial question would be to ask what difference, in any, does the fact that one is oneself the victim of the demeaning treatment makes to one’s response to it. Hampton (1988) is helpful in this regard.)
-   Third, you should (briefly) examine critically the common view that resentment is a _moral emotion,_ that is to say, a response to treatment when it is perceived as _morally wrong._ The crucial question here is whether one is roused to resentment by the treatment of others only when it is perceived as wrong. (One way to make your case would be to provide a compelling counter-example to the common view, where resentment seems the appropriate response to the treatment of others, even though it is not perceived as wrong.)

