**Self-deception involves two major paradoxes that threaten to undermine its very possibility. The self-deceiver must intend to deceive herself, but that seems bound  to make the deception unsuccessful, for two reasons: first, I could not succeed in deceiving anyone (you or myself) if they are  aware of my intention to deceive; second, it seems impossible to believe something by just intending to believe it. And the self-deceiver must both believe and not believe the same proposition, but that does not seem possible. Tamar Gendler argues that understanding self-deception as pretense allows us to resolve these paradoxes . I can pretend at will, and the intention to pretend does not undermine my pretense. And since believing and pretending are different propositional attitudes, they can coexist peacefully: I can successfully pretend that something is the case while believing it is not. But is pretending that something you believe is not the case is the case really _deceiving_ yourself?  
**

You should turn in your essay on this site by **_Monday, 5pm._**

As long as what one pretends is true is operationally uses instead of what one believes is true, then this is effectively deceiving yourself. If the pretense is held to strong and fast enough that it obscures the contradictory belief and that no stimuli forces the contention of the belief with the pretense then yes this is deceiving oneself. If I pretend a car accident wasn't my fault despite believing otherwise and I hold onto this pretense as some form of shielding mechanism then this pretense which I want enables me to deceive myself through some intermediary without me being aware that this pretense is just a vehicle for self-deception. However, one can argue this isn't self-deception because there is one truth which one accepts and that for it to be self-deception this belief needs to be properly substituted with the 'false'