# Weekly assignment 5

**Nietzsche claims: "This alone, I surmise, constitutes the actual physiological cause of _ressentiment,_ vengefulness, and the like: a _desire to deaden pain by means of affects_." (GM III §15) What do you take this to mean? Is it a plausible explanation for our susceptibility to feelings like _ressentiment_ and vengefulness?**

Nietzsche claims that when people are in suffering, the way they seek to alleviate themselves from the torturous pain is through emotion. They attempt to anesthetize - decrease the awareness of - their pain by invoking strong, violent emotions that by their nature demand attention and this continued attention then fuels the emotion even more. The desire to get trapped in this cycle arises out of the desire for relief from the previously held pain. However the emotional/affective state required to turn one's attention away from suffering of such a nature are incredibly wild and first arise under the pretext of needing someone to blame for their pain. 

The need to blame then manifests itself in anger and a want for revenge, against those who one imagines has caused it. The sufferer as Nietzche says in this state is more than willing to make evil-doers out of anyone. Since this vengeful feeling is simply latching onto anything it can, we can say this feeling is detached and we know the detachment of the affects from their causes and the lack of release of these emotions is what yields ressentiment. We can thus see this is a plausible explanation for our susceptibility to ressentiment, because it is almost as Nietzsche alludes to an emotional reflex - akin to the physical reflexive return of a blow - which involves the desire for someone to blame, someone to seek revenge on when we are in emotional pain, and these ultimately give way to ressentiment. 