Please write a 200-250 words essay on the following topic:

**Nietzsche claims that the concept of freedom of will is a "self-deception of impotence" (GM I §13), suggesting that it is a fantasy motivated  by a feeling of impotence. Explain how this might be so.**

Nietzche talks about how the weak unreasonably ask of the strong not to express their strength since their strength as in the case of the birds of prey and lambs negatively affect the weak lambs when they are carried off. When the weak are vindictive against the strong for the strength they do not possess, they frame all expressions of the strength of their opposition as evil. They say, for example as Nietzche talks about, that to attack, retaliate is evil and the weak choose to be not evil - to be good. He says the separation the weak create between the doer and their actions is not well founded because the doer is an afterthought a trick of language. But because they can in their minds separate the strong from the actions which represent strength through this language, they can justifiably hold responsible the strong for commiting actions which display strength which the weak judge as evil and say the strong should act as the weak do because the weak perform 'good' actions, thus attempting to rid themselves of the negative effects felt by expressions of strength.

The way in which freedom of will is a self-deception is because it reframes the problem of one being unable to resist one's strong oppressors/opposers by virtue of being weak as the choice to be 'good' despite not having any other option, and the strongs' as a choice to be 'evil'. They as Nietzche says construe weakness for freedom and their existence an accomplishment. They delude themselves into thinking that they have made the choice to act this way since it aligns with their concocted system of morals and if they had the choice to be 'strong' they would not commit the actions the strong commit against them but of course they don't have this choice and so in general this position holds little value apart from to appease their impotence.