Please write a 200-50 word essay on the following topic:

**Nozick claims that "revenge involves a particular emotional tone, pleasure in the suffering of another, while retribution either need involve no emotional tone, or involves another one, namely, pleasure at justice being done." (367) Understanding retribution to be a conception of _punishment_ (giving the wrongdoer what they deserve), discuss this claim. Do you agree with it? If you do, can you (briefly) characterize the pleasure of revenge?**

I agree with Nozick's claim. Retribution is the doling out of justice, it is the consequence faced by those who've violated some codified norms/laws of their society. The action that brings about a need for retribution is detached from the individual who performs it. The form the retribution takes is dependent on the severity of the action committed, not the individual who performs it. And it is a thing that can be doled out by anyone without any tie to the victim of the action, as it is the action that people take offense to, not the individuals involved. It is evident from these, that retribution is detached, emotionless, and at least attempting to be impartial, in accordance with the claim. And one can even say it takes pleasure in restoring justice, protecting the moral, social codes of the society. 

Revenge however, is incredibly personal. The action that brings about revenge need not violate some sacrosanct code of conduct, but only spurn another enough. Desire for revenge can only be felt by one person towards another. It is not a regulated response to the action, but a violent response towards the individual. It's goal is to see that at least the same amount of suffering dealt to the revenger is dealt to the revengee. It is in the revenger's eyes an evening of the scales, making sure both individuals are ultimately on the same 'footing' in pain encountered. The pleasure received is partly due to one's increased feeling of power/superiority in the ability to harm one who has harmed them, the security of self gained, and gratifaction of watching the other suffer as much if not worse as they had.