## Agenda
- [ ]  


# Reflections

I'm feeling particularly discontent and jealous today. The cause of this is many things. Probably the primary one is seeing the orientations and IMP welcoming events for the coming freshmen. That kind of experience still seems almost impossible to me, but they're lucky they wont have such a pathetic experience like we. I also came across this girl mia lane's insta post and she's pretty and has a bazillion insta posts of fun times with friends in college, and I think she has a boyfriend too at least going off her insta it seems that way. And I just feel more and more like I've wasted the first two years of my college life. And then there's the insta posts of all these people going to italy and these other fancy places and chilling with other brown students or just seeming at least like they're having the time of their lives. And I can't help but compare my experiences and repeatedly find them falling short of theirs. 

I want to party and chill and have fun with my friends. I want a larger friend circle. I want more diverse friends not just indians sticking to indians and internationals alike. I want more friends who are girls. I want to meet more people and form good connections or relations with them. I want to be decently cool and funny, capable of holding good conversations, of leaving an impression. But I wonder what it takes to be those things to various people. I want a girlfriend to, or at least to have interactions closer to that space than that of acquaintances and friends. I want to have the courage to flirt with a girl at a party. To go up and start a conversation with a stranger and not be creepy or weird. 

I want to be interesting. And to be interesting you have to be well read or well learnt, knowing of many various kinds of things able to pickup a conversation from any realm and continue it. I need to pay more active attention in conversations with strangers. Too often I find that I get the feeling that I should be in a group talking to those other people instead of more fully and properly engaging whatever group im in, and also that sometimes I have no group and simply flock to where there is comfort and already friends. This is a human problem, not a me problem, of wanting more than we have always greedy, always looking for what is in our minds the next best thing. But it is something that can and should be fixed, I'm not denying that.

I also feel so inexperienced and am always left wanting for more out of my love life, if one can even call it that considering it's painful non existence. And I think the first step to that is just being more confident, more proactive and giving considerably less shits. This is something I should have realized and fixed in high school, afterall I don't think I've ever had more than just one or two friends who were girls. And the lack of experience, of interactions with them has made me more scared. More wary of what the rules are like in this domain, what are the boundaries, what is normal and platonic, and what is indicative of wanting more. Too scared to say or do something that may hide some secret meaning, or act on the untrained and untested interpretation of those from another. But I suppose all birds must fly eventually.

I'm also overwhelmed by internship application season, and the dread of starting late, not really knowing what I'm doing and what I want out of life. Always I hide behind the easy things to tell myself, that yes i want to be a software engineer maybe quantum computing will be it for me. But the life sounds boring and mundane even if it is filled with comfort and riches. But what other path is open to me, none that I can see at least. I just want to live a good life, a fun life. So full to the brim with wild and interesting stories that I struggle to remember them all. I want to move others and be moved myself. I want to experience all the things I can possible experience while I'm here. Wanting to live a good, comfortable, free life. Is that too selfish? Too simple. probably. I don't particularly have any aspirations that stoke the fire of my soul like others seem to have. And I think herein also lies my problem.  The lack of passion. 

Then there is also my poor communication skills, which is a result of feeling overwhelmed and instead of being logical and attempting it but doing so poorly, I hide myself away. Ignore notifications and what not pretending as if the problem doesnt exist and doesnt need to be addressed. And once i do this enough it is hard, when the motivationa nd energy returns to justify doing it then and having to come up with excuses time and time again, because I cant tell them Im sorry I was feeling overwhelmed so I shut down and didnt talk to anyone. That im introverted and now I realize potentially extremely so, and I get scared, and anxious about interactions with others even if they are my friends.

And here another duality. I feel anxious about socialization and yet I want to be great at it. we all want what we dont have. But i suppose I should know myself, and learn that this is a thing not in the cards for me. But then again, I hold those cards, and I should be capable of changing my hand whenever i like. 

Still I feel jealous, scared, anxious, stressed, and unhappy. All shitty things to feel. Though it makes sense it hits me this hard after I just finished reading the First Binding, which was great, but it more acutely and starkly highlighted the contrast of a life I wish mine resembled and the one it is in actuality. 

Hopefully these feelings will change, just as the world turns and this is only the dark before the inevitable light. I even now still like to believe, that the change I seek within myself and in my life - that what I seek is also seeking me. 