What single factor (or set of factors) best explains why sovereign territorial states currently constitute the fundamental unit of contemporary international relations? In making your argument, draw from readings from the first six weeks of the course, as well as supplemental material (listed below) that we engaged with collectively in class. The factor (or factors) on which you base your essay could be ones mentioned by authors we read, your own ideas, or some combination thereof. Lay out the logic of your argument and explain why this factor (or set of factors) wields more explanatory power than other possible explanations. Consider specifying what aspects of sovereignty’s emergence and/or endurance are not explained by the factors on which your essay focuses. Consider also what scholars who would disagree with you might say about your argument. Explain why such criticisms, as well as why other possible explanations, would be less persuasive than your viewpoint. Consider what additional evidence, if gathered and analyzed, could more conclusively demonstrate whether or not your argument is valid. Finally, what does your argument imply about the nature of sovereign territorial states, including how international political authority might evolve in the future?

Separate into First world and Third World categories. First world use Spruyt's argument for mutual reinforcement, competitive advantage, punctuated equilibrium, imitation and for Third World use Anghie's point of the Mandate system enforcing a neocolonialism to force their state to model that of Europeans. Maybe briefly talk about China and Japan and how they're more unique than this. 

# The Sovereign State and its Competitors - Spruyt

- Spruyt claims the unilinear view of history is wrong and instead approaches the cause for soveriegn states being the dominant model through a punctated equilibrium lense like that of darwinism
	- He talks about how the generative cause for alternative models is different from the reason that sovereign state model is what survived as the dominant one
		- “Critical to my analysis is the separation of the generative causes of such new institutional arrangements from the causes that led to the demise of some.”
	- “That is, changes in political organization seem to be preceded by broad shifts in constraints and opportunities imposed on social actors by the external milieu.”
	- “Transaction costs, set belief systems, and standard operating procedures mitigate against frequent overhaul.”
	- “Once one form has established itself as dominant, relative stability in institutional types should follow.17 There is a certain path dependency in institutional design.”
	- “Actors have particular interests and perspectives and corresponding preferred forms of organization. An external change, a change in the overall milieu in which that society is placed, will lead to a shift in the relative power of social and political actors. Individuals will seek to capitalize on their improved relative position and change the existing political institutions. I thus take a methodological individualist perspective. Individuals have reasoned preferences to support one institution over another. The emergence of new institutions must thus be traced back to the ability of actors to pursue those preferences.”
- Spruty argues that the exogenous variable that was the generative cause for different forms of political and social alignments in city-leagues, etc was rise of trade and economic growth
	- “I argue that all three were affected by the rise of trade, my independent variable. During the eleventh, twelfth, and thirteenth centuries, Europe went through a remarkable period of economic growth. This exogenous variable set a process of realignments in motion.”
	- 
- Spruyt's main arguments for the superiority of the soveriegn state model
	- “I will argue that selection occurs both by systemic pressure on the less competitive types and by societal choices of actors who switch their allegiances. Systemically, from a top-down perspective, there are three main reasons why states survived and displaced other forms of organization. First, the internal logic of organization of the sovereign state had less deficiencies than its rivals. Sovereign, territorial states were better at rationalizing their economies and mobilizing the resources of their societies.33 Second, state sovereignty proved to be an effective and efficient means of organizing external, interunit behavior. Sovereign states could more easily make credible commitments than their nonsovereign counterparts. Third, sovereign states selected out and delegitimized actors who did not fit a system of territorially demarcated and internally hierarchical authorities. The organizational principles of territorial states and city-leagues were mutually incompatible, exactly because the latter had no specific borders.”
	- “Selection, however, also occurs by social choice, from the bottom up. Since sovereignty is an institutional mechanism which creates a focal point for coordinating behavior, members of sovereign societies can achieve gains from long-run, iterative cooperation. If the benefits of long-term cooperation outweigh the benefits of short-run defection, social actors have an incentive to defect from institutions that do not provide for these benefits”
	- “Institutional mimicry constitutes a second form of social choice.30 For example, once the benefits of sovereign statehood became apparent, the German feudal lords started to behave like territorial rulers. They started to call themselves princes and to perform regalian tasks such as regulating weights and measures, standardizing coinage, and rationalizing justice.”
	- “Tilly argues that the creation of new types of units in Europe basically proceeded along two dimensions. The first dimension was coercive intensive and the second was capital intensive. “In the coercion intensive mode, rulers squeezed the means of war from their own populations and others they conquered, building massive structures of extraction in the process.”38 This method of resource mobilization occurred in regions that lacked strongly developed towns, such as Brandenburg and Russia. Areas that had well-developed towns, such as Italy and the Netherlands, had to make bargains with capitalists—the capital-intensive mode of resource mobilization.
	- National states such as England and France combined both coercive- and capital-intensive modes. “In the intermediate capitalized-coercion mode, rulers did some of each, but spent more of their effort than did their capital-intensive neighbors on incorporating capitalists and sources of capital directly into the structures of their states.”39”
	- “Gradually, competitive pressure selected out those organizations that used only one of the two methods of resource mobilization. The national state, which utilized both of these methods, proved to be better at waging war.40”
	- “First, Tilly explains the variation between types of organization by differential responses to the functional demand of waging war.”
	- “My account is based on the impact of economic change and subsequent politics of coalitional bargaining. I see the economic transformation of medieval Europe as the primary independent variable which made new political coalitions possible"
	- “Tilly explains selection among rival modes of organization by their ability to wage war. From my perspective, the ability to wage war is itself determined by the efficacy of particular institutional arrangements.”
	- “Tilly explains the variation in unit type by different responses to the functional necessity of waging war. These different responses can in turn be explained by regional variation in the strength of towns. I argue, by contrast, that variation can be explained by different responses to a changing economic environment”
	- “Tilly, selection is rooted in the unit’s security performance. From my perspective, the critical variable is institutional structure”
	- “Whether or not a particular type of organization will survive depends on its ability to prevent freeriding, its credibility to commit in international treaties, compatibility with other types of organization, and the benefits that it provides to its subjects (in order to prevent defection).”
- “The national state centralized and accumulated more coercive means than its rivals.45 The physical size of the state makes the difference. ”
- “If, as Tilly proposes, war making is the crucial selecting mechanism, then it is difficult to explain why so many small states survived. Why, for example, were the minuscule German states recognized as treaty signees equal to France or England, even in the middle of the nineteenth century? ”
- “it is the empowerment by other states of such entities that allows them to continue to operate in world affairs rather than their ability to wield force.”
- “In summary, I basically disagree with Tilly on two dimensions. First, I explain institutional variation by the specific nature of social coalitions following economic change rather than by different responses to the functional prerequisite of war making. Second, I argue that whereas war is an important factor, the ability to wage war itself needs to be explained by institutional analysis. I would argue that on these dimensions, however, my theory complements Tilly’s analysis by specifying the particular bargains underlying the state-making process.”

## Chapter 3

- “modern state is verily unique, for it claims sovereignty and territoriality. It is sovereign in that it claims final authority and recognizes no higher source of jurisdiction. It is territorial in that rule is defined as exclusive authority over a fixed territorial space.”
- “contemporary state is not only territorial but is internally sovereign. That is, it is externally demarcated from others. It makes no claim to rule outside its borders and, conversely, recognizes no authority above it within them. Internally it claims final authority. In Weber’s terms, it claims the monopoly of violence or, put in more general political terms, it is the final locus of jurisdiction.”
- “I argue that feudalism is a highly decentralized system of political organization which is based on personal ties.”
- “There are three main differences between the logic of feudal organization and organization based on sovereign territoriality. First, feudal rule lacked hierarchy. Second, territorial rule was not exclusive. Third, feudal rule of territory was imperfect. Manorial relations in some ways resembled territorial rule the closest. One would be subject to the jurisdiction of a lord by one’s residence in a given area. However, seen as a system of larger political rule, the territorial holdings of the lords were dependent on the specific personal relations in which they were embedded. Feudal relations superseded the manorial.”
- “Consequently, one can question whether the feudal logic of organization is even properly conceived as a system of territorial rule”
- “In summary, the feudal logic of rule differed from sovereign territoriality in that it lacked territorial delimitation52 and lacked a final locus of jurisdiction. It was a system based on personal ties conferring rights and obligations across territories. These ties were reaffirmed by the construction of nobility as a caste, a special legal class which demarcated itself by cultural markers such as dress, manners, and rituals and which claimed superiority simply as a birthright.”
- “The revolutionary impact of the Investiture Conflict was therefore twofold.92 First, in separating the two realms, it necessitated secular rule to justify itself by other than spiritual means. Second, in distinguishing and separating these two realms, which both had claims to universality, the two became rivals. Which one was to be subject to the other? As a result, both camps had to seek political allies, search for new sources of legitimation, and rationalize their administrative and legal machineries. The Investiture Conflict in a sense necessitated rulers to invent “secular” rule.”
- “Traditional empires have usually had a universalist system of rule. They have basically aspired to exercise political control over their relevant sphere of economic interaction.”“Universal empires tended to claim some form of cosmological justification.”“mperial strategy failed, first because it could only reach a compromise with the papacy at considerable expense. The compromise, concluded in the Concordat of Worms, conferred to the emperor the right of approval, but he could no longer appoint the bishop with sacerdotal insignia, the staff and ring.114 This was more than mere symbolism and meant that the emperor did not have jurisdiction over bishops in the emperor’s capacity as member of the clergy. ”
- “The struggles of this period can be described as “a three cornered conflict between a secularized episcopate (anxious to preserve its customary prerogatives against papal centralization), the imperial power (which saw papal centralization as a menace to its own monarchical authority) and the Papacy (which saw centralization as the only way to a reformed and purified Church).”
- 

## Part 2: The Emergence of New Modes of Organization

### Chapter 4 - Economic Rennaisance of the late middle ages

- “Sovereignty is not a fact. It is a concept which men in certain circumstances have applied—a quality they have attributed or a claim they have counter-posed—to the political power which they or other men were exercising.”
- “result of this economic dynamism was that a social group, the town dwellers, came into existence with new sources of revenue and power, which did not fit the old feudal order. This new social group, the burghers, had various incentives to search for political allies who were willing to change the existing order. Neither the burghers’ material preferences nor their belief systems fit the existing institutional and conceptual frameworks. “The new trading and commercial classes of the towns could not settle into the straightjacket of the feudal order, and the towns became a chief agent in its final disruption”
- “Generative Phase
		Independent variable:
			Economic growth and expansion of trade (1000-1350).
		Intervening variable:
			New coalitions become possible because of shifts in relative power caused by economic expansion. Towns emerge that do not fit the old feudal order. They seek to create new institutions by allying with political entrepreneurs.
		Outcome:
			A variety of new institutions—sovereign, territorial state; city-state; and city-league.
	Selective Phase
		Causes of selection:
			Competition Mutual empowerment Mimicry and exit
		Outcome:
			Sovereign, territorial state.”
- “Given that towns had to contend with political opponents who wished to subject cities for their own benefit, for example, to gain revenue, towns would have to band together or seek territorial lords who were less predatorial than others. Hence, towns required either city-leagues to pool their resources or high territorial lords who were willing to mitigate their exactions from rival lords.”
- “French towns:
	low volume low added value
	Corresponding level of urbanization relatively low, with the exception of Flanders and northern France. Towns prefer central organization to provide protection and improve economic climate (standardization, reduction of transaction costs, etc.).
	
	German towns:
	high volume low added value
	Moderate level of urbanization. Towns need a central actor or league to pool their resources for defense and to improve economic environment (standardization, reduction of transaction costs, etc.).
	
	Italian towns:
	moderate volume high added value
	High level of urbanization. Large towns with considerable resources do not need central actor for protection. Predatorial market suggests competition rather than collusion. Competition for market shares with high payoffs.”
- “
	Expected preferences of towns
	Actual political coalitions
	Outcome
	
	France:
	central actor
	Weak kings ally with towns. Bargain based on shared material interests regarding tax structure and royal administration as well as shared perspectives on preferred social order. Aristocracy and clergy paid off by pension schemes and tax exemptions.
	sovereign, territorial state
	
	Germany:
	central actor
	German king (Holy Roman Emperor) pursues imperial strategy in Italy and surrenders control over the German towns to the feudal lords. After failure in Italy, the king becomes a figurehead. Towns form leagues against the lords.
	city-leagues and independent lordships
	
	Italy:
	urban independence
	Urbanized aristocracy Unlike Germany or France, no clash between towns and lords. Bourgeois and nobles resist central control by German emperor or pope.
	city-states”
- “emergence of sovereign, territorial rule was, therefore, not merely a fight between the forces favoring fragmentation versus centralization; it was a contest about the very nature of authority and kingship.”
- “But although this shift in beliefs and values was important, it alone cannot explain the decline of the medieval order. Much of Europe was exposed to similar new ideas and values, yet political outcomes differed. For example, although the emergence of a monetarized economy and pursuit of profit brought with it a revaluation of manual labor and economic gain, this was true throughout much of western Europe. Moreover, Germany, France, and Italy all had access to Roman law, and consequently all their social and political elites were familiar with the idea of sovereignty. Yet institutional outcomes differed quite radically in all three. Changes in belief systems alone cannot explain the institutional variation”
- “Elective affinity is a predisposition to certain ideas, not the instrumental construction of values or ideas solely to serve one’s material interests.”
- “whether such ideas become routinized will depend on their material support. The carriers of such ideas will often depend on economic power or coercive means to spread and develop these ideas. Social groups will look for political allies who can advance their preferred order. Conversely, political elites have an incentive to propagate and foster new ideas to gain support from social groups. They manipulate cultural symbols for their own instrumental reasons.38 It is thus the correspondence of interests and ideas that brings actors together in a coalition and thereby empowers new sets of ideas in political practice”
- “The instruments that the church used to rationalize its proceedings were later appropriated by aspiring territorial rulers and modernizing elements in late medieval society.
	First, the church had led the way in diminishing the role of kinship structures. It particularly had propagated the idea of primogeniture, because consolidated holdings would increase ecclesiastical revenue through wills.59 It thus broke up older tribal and kin relations and made it impossible later to organize market exchange along those lines.60
	Second, the church had tried to diminish the level of ubiquitous violence by outlawing war on particular days and regulating certain modes of combat. In proclaiming the Peace and Truce of God, the church thus appropriated the role of a public actor.61 One function of this authority was to maintain the general peace. In so doing the church created the idea that one of the roles of government was to provide for the collective good.
	Third, in arguing for a hierarchy of feudal rule rather than a grab bag of cross-cutting and multiple obligations, the church moved against fragmentation of political order. That is, it argued for a feudal pyramid. In Strayer’s words, feudal rule in the twelfth century…”
- “the contest between church and empire eroded the basis of both sources of authority. It delegitimized both papacy and empire. Popes had to contend with antipopes, the emperor faced rivals supported by lords and pope, and some bishoprics had two bishops. Pope and emperor branded each other as false monks, usurpers, and heretics. In addition to delegitimizing each other, the contest also made secular rulers aware that ecclesiastical support was a dangerous basis for political rule. Ultimately, ecclesiastical lords would have to answer to Rome. In a sense the denial of sacral status to political rule necessitated that secular rulers find alternative justifications”
- “other words, the demarcation and conceptualization of time and space are essentially contested concepts. “Against the merchant’s time, the church set up its own time.”69 The traditional medieval conceptualization of spatial and chronological order did not correspond to the new beliefs of society.70 The burghers had very different views about time and space. Time and space did not exist informs homologous to heaven; they did not exist transcendentally but were constructed and designed by mortals. Such new images made the later articulation of authority in and over geographical space possible.”
- “About the middle of the eleventh century a dramatic expansion of the European economy occurred. This expansion went hand-in-hand with an increase in long-distance trade. The growth in trade made further division of labor possible. Towns increased in size and number. These settlements had widely different material interests from the old feudal and ecclesiastical order. Consequently the burghers were motivated to change existing institutions. To accomplish this, they either formed political alliances with other actors, such as an aspiring territorial ruler, or they pursued the largest amount of independence possible. Whether these towns pursued autonomy on their own, formed leagues, or allied with some centralizing authority depended first of all on the size and strength of the individual towns. Few towns, save the Italian, were strong enough to go it alone. The second factor influencing the urban set of preferences was the nature of trade. The relatively low-volume, high-profit trade of the Mediterranean, the trade in luxury goods, suggested that individual towns might try to capture a monopoly position on their own. By contrast, the low-profit, high-volume trade of the north made that policy impossible. No one actor could individually monopolize the[…]”

### Chapter 5 - “The Rise of the Sovereign, Territorial State in Capetian France”

- “after three centuries of Capetian rule, we find the basis of a sovereign state, so much so that Joseph Strayer, focusing mainly on France, can argue that by 1300 the state had become the dominant form of political organization in Europe”
- “The first variety sees states simply as larger units compared to feudal lordships. Efficiency of scale favored the king over dukes and counts. It is basically a macrostructural account which pays little attention to social bargaining. The operative dynamic consists of Darwinian selection. Smaller units fell by the wayside.”
- “The second, and more persuasive, interpretation explains the emergence of the state by the exchange of revenue for the provision of security by the monarch. From that perspective the king can be seen as the provider of protection in exchange for the consent of individuals to be taxed. Since military security became increasingly expensive because of the ever-rising costs of warfare, taxes had to be raised accordingly.17 Corresponding with the growth of taxation was the rise of centralized administration and a bureaucratic apparatus”
- “The decline of the Roman Empire, for example, can be attributed to the increasing success of cavalry. The efficiency of scale of cavalry favored smaller political units. Hence the Roman borders contracted.19”
- “In reality, however, the impacts of technological changes are always mediated through the dominant groups in power.24 To reinforce this point, one need only realize that the impact of military technological changes led to widely diverse outcomes throughout Europe. Although the technologies of war were generally available—that is French, Italian, and German actors all had roughly similar access to such technologies—they did not have the same political effect.”
- “Society consists of a variety of identifiable actors who pursue a complex set of objectives. Political entrepreneurs seek to expand their power, burghers seek economic security, peasants might desire less control by their feudal and ecclesiastical lords, and so on. Out of these competing interests come social alliances which create institutions. One cannot argue that a particular institution emerged as an efficient response to the environmental stimulus. That would be to deduce preferences from outcomes. Although selection clearly occurs, the selective process only explains the subsequent relative efficacy and efficiency of that institution vis-à-vis other institutional arrangements. It does not explain the reasons why individuals preferred one type of institution over another, or how that preference won out in the political process. One cannot simply say that states emerged because they waged war more effectively and more efficiently than feudal organization. One can perhaps say that states survived because they were better at waging war than synchronic and rival forms of political organization. ”
- “one might also argue against the efficiency-of-scale theory that the issue of relative efficiency and effectiveness is actually one of efficiency of institutional makeup rather than size.”
- “Given the change in the nature of warfare, individuals perceived the king to be the logical provider of protection, and in exchange for that protection they consented to taxation.”
- “Like Strayer, I suggest that state formation was due to the acquiescence of privileged classes.39 I argue that the emergence of the towns permitted new social bargains, which enabled the Capetian kings to centralize their authority. There were benefits for the bourgeois to side with the French king and support his policies against the nobility and church.”
- “the size of the towns and their moderate revenues prevented them from acting independently (see Tables 5.1 and 5.2). Unlike Venice or Florence, whose revenues and military power equaled that of any sovereign, territorial state, the French towns needed some form of organization to pool their economic and political resources to gain their objectives. Yet as Robert Fawtier suggests, they could not become independent or form leagues because they were too small.”
- “Second, the nature of the trade, with its low profit margins, was an inducement to search for forms of organization that could reduce costs and introduce more certitude in the business environment. The towns would prefer a system with standardized taxes and more regulation of weights and measures. In economic terms, the towns would prefer a form of political organization that could reduce transaction and information cost”
- “The increasing ability to raise revenue was thus fundamental to the formation of a stronger, more centralized monarchy. More specifically, it enabled the Capetians to construct an army and an administration that were based on monetary payment rather than in-kind transfers. ”
- “Aside from having to pay the taille, rural laborers were also subject to other taxes and feudal exactions. The ability to evade such forms of taxation, by moving to a chartered town and by paying a fixed taille to the chartering king or lord, must have seemed attractive”“Towns made it standard practice to grant freedom to any individual who had resided in that town, uncontested, for a year and a day.57 They thus provided a commoner the opportunity to escape the burden of serving a multitude of masters as a peasant.”
- “he gradual incorporation of various areas into the royal domain was accomplished by a process of mutual acquiescence, marriage alliances, and sometimes force. But in all cases such incorporation was based on particularistic deals.”
- “First, according to feudal theory, the king formed the top of the feudal hierarchy and hence had the legal ability to create new feudal relations.69 Towns were willing to put this social idea into political practice and thus favored a more centralized system. Consequently, towns did not overtly contravene feudal theory. Instead they understood their association, the commune, to be a physical body which could be incorporated into the feudal system just as any vassal. But because they sought to be independent, they attempted to be placed as high as possible in the feudal hierarchy. The best possible situation, therefore, was to be the direct vassal of the king and nominally not subject to any other lords. “It was an attempt of communities to rise by force of union in the feudal hierarchy and themselves to rank side by side with feudal seigneurs; sometimes as their vassals, but whenever possible, as suzerains themselves and tenants-in-chief of the Crown, privileged and independent of all but nominal allegiance.”
- “political bargain broke down or did not yield sufficient results, the French kings would divert the burden to groups who were not crucial to his objectives. Properties and money of Jews were confiscated, or the Jews were taxed inexorably. Defaulting on loans from Italian bankers was another remedy. Philip the Fair accused, imprisoned, and executed the Templars who had acted as the Treasury after he had defaulted on loans from Italian bankers. Their goods became part of royal revenue. Such strategies were, however, onetime actions.”
- “As a consequence, by enabling the king and high lords to obtain mercenaries, the warrior aristocracy eroded the very basis of its existence”
- “For example, nobles who resided in areas that became part of the royal domain would receive pensions of several hundred pounds and were thus pulled into the royal orbit.88 Philip the Fair paid the duke of Brabant a pension of 2500 l.t. (livres tournois) to remain neutral and not aid the Count of Flanders who was in rebellion. He offered the Count of Hainaut 6000 l.t. annual rent.89 To put it bluntly, money bought allies. Nobles also routinely received a percentage of tax receipts for their area. When the royal taille became increasingly regularized from the 1380s onward, the clergy and nobility were exempted”“In short, the French king was too weak to tax the nobles. Instead he obtained revenues from other sources and bought noble acquiescence by tax exemption or outright payments.”“The direct tax system of seventeenth century France was largely in place by 1379.”
- “king also needed the church for a variety of reasons. The church offered institutional resources besides revenue. It was a model of efficient hierarchical organization which collected revenue from faraway parishes. It also managed to dispense authority by an effective administrative machinery. And, most important perhaps, the clergy were men of knowledge who could be used within the royal bureaucracy. Thus, the chancellor was, from the end of the Carolingian Empire until Philip Augustus’s reign, a member of the clergy. In return for such service, the king would often grant his clerks a small benefice and perhaps a pension. In accepting, they would become nominal vassals of the king. For clerical members, service to the king was also a stepping stone in the administration of the church. In an environment where church and secular authority sought each other’s support, clerks who worked as liaisons made rapid promotion. Finally, the church was an attractive ally to the king because it could even provide military resources. In 1194, for example, twenty monasteries provided the king with 1,500 sergeants.96”
- “As long as the king sought legitimacy as the highest overlord in the feudal hierarchy, he needed the church’s sanction”
- “The pope gained a secular defender to carry out the task of Rome. The king gained a source of revenue, able administration, and basis for legitimation. And so it is not surprising to see Louis IX (1226-1270), crusader in Egypt, Montaillou, and Tunisia, become St. Louis, blessed by the church.”
- “To conclude, royal administration was based on and provided opportunities to bourgeois and lesser nobility. “In short, the royal administration was a service which attracted Frenchmen of the middle classes because it offered them a path to wealth, position, and rank”
- “ohn Ruggie has rightly pointed out that the transformation from feudal rule to that of the sovereign, territorial state involved an important epistemic shift.125 The transformation did not merely entail a change in who exercised power; it redefined what was to count as power and as legitimate rule. The origins of late medieval ideas, such as public authority rather than personal rule, the position of the king as fountain of law, and the concept of exclusive authority over goods and land, are highly complex and difficult to trace”
- “I argue that the social ideals of the bourgeois and the transformation of the institutional order that the towns envisioned corresponded with the views of the Capetians. They had similar views regarding authority and justice. They particularly had a mutual preference for written, Roman law. This was not merely an alternative institutional preference but a conceptual reorientation of what should count as proof and truth. Such reorientation was complex and included clashes on collective versus private property; personal rule and public authority; divine versus secular law; and the challenge of territorial rule to universalist actors”
- “the support of the church for the king was an important factor in the early formation of the concept of sovereignty”“In short, the adoption of Roman law had important ramifications for the conduct of business”
- “Roman law also entailed a different view of what was to count as proof and evidence. It favored written documents and fact finding rather than trial by ordeal or combat”
- “The emergence of the sovereign state involved a transfer of loyalties to a secular state at the expense of local dynasts and the church”
- “the king’s power grew as a result of support from the burghers for royal policy.151 Because of the expanding market, townspeople were in search of alternative political institutions more conducive to commerce and their way of life. Royal and bourgeois interests converged on the issues of taxation and administration, and they shared similar belief systems. Regular tax revenue was of great importance for royal policy because it allowed the king to weaken the old feudal order. His increased monetary capability also allowed the king to appease the nobility and clergy through side payments of pensions, tax exemptions, and rents”

### Chapter 6 conclusion
- “In Germany the reverse took place. The kings perceived their interests to lie with a universalist order, and more specifically with the control of Italy and the pope. They attempted to follow through on their imperial claims by conceding control over the towns to the feudal lords. No alliance of burghers and king materialized, and in its absence the possibility of a sovereign state evaporated.
	Towns responded by forming city-leagues, which could represent the towns, organize them for war, and bring some regularity to trade. The Hanseatic League performed just such functions.”
- “In a sense its logic resembled that of an empire; “imperial expansion tends to incorporate all significant economic needs within the domain itself.”117 It lacked a clear hierarchical authority and formal territorial borders. It attempted to construct political institutions to organize its long-distance commerce, wherever that went. Ultimately, however, that system of rule was destined to come into conflict with the logic of a state system.”

### Chapter 7 Conclusion
- “The strong impact and particular nature of long-distance trade are the primary reasons why no central authority emerged, be it a king or confederacy. The large urban population, made possible by this commerce, and their considerable economic and military resources diminished the necessity for a royal protector or town alliance. Moreover, the specific nature of this trade made towns prefer competition rather than central control. The Hansa’s low-value, high-volume trade yielded low profit margins. Collusion was one way to obtain a higher price for Hansa commodities. The great profits of Mediterranean trade, by contrast, were primarily from low-volume, high-value commerce. Individual towns sought, and Genoa and Venice often obtained, monopolies of particular trade routes”
- “Italian towns were not under external lordly pressure, as were French and German towns. Foreign powers also played an important role in Italian politics. On the one hand, these powers consciously sought to divide the communes. But on the other hand, communes could also form alliances with these actors to maintain their independence.”
- “The variety of social conditions and different forms of government thus reflected a disparity of interests, quite unlike that of the city-leagues. The communes also perceived themselves to be culturally distinct from each other. Each commune had its regimento, rules of order, which regulated citizenship and social and political activity. Each commune also developed the concept of sovereignty and thus saw no legitimate reason why any authority, be it pope, emperor, or town confederacy, should stand above the government of the city.”
- “The city-state did not integrate its surrounding countryside and the subjected towns. This shows, for example, in the lack of citizenship privileges for the inhabitants in these subjected areas. Not all members within its territorial parameters were thus full members of the city-state.113 This lack of integration of different interests likewise shows in the inherent factionalism of many Italian towns. In France, the king could claim to be a mediator of interests, since he stood to benefit from the overall welfare of the kingdom. The Italian city-state lacked such a political actor. The government was simply perceived as the extension of a specific factional interest. As we will see, this proved to be an institutional weakness in the long run.”
- 

## Part 3: “Competition, Mutual Empowerment, and Choice: The Advantages of Sovereign Territoriality”

### Chapter 8
- “But within sovereign states there existed a final decision-making structure which brooked no outside interference and which gradually claimed a monopoly on violence and justice. In addition, the sovereign state confined itself territorially. That is, sovereigns claimed hierarchy within borders and recognized no higher authority.”
- “lthough individual towns were surrounded by city walls, the leagues were not only noncontiguous, they lacked borders altogether. They were functionally but not territorially integrated for mutual defense of liberty and commercial interests. In short, unlike the sovereign state, the Hansa did not differentiate its authority by territorial specification, nor did it recognize a final locus of authority, either internally or externally.”
- “The city-state formed an intermediate category of institutional structure. With the sovereign, territorial state it had in common a strict demarcation of jurisdiction by fixed borders. Also, externally the dominant city acted as the focal point for interunit contacts. But like the city-league, the city-state was internally divided. Given that the city-state consisted of one city dominating other towns, the latter always contested the rule of the leading center. Sovereignty in the city-state, to use Tilly’s terminology, was fragmented.”
- “Institutions that internally had a final decision-making authority were in a better position to overcome the feudal remnants of economic and legal particularism. The king’s interest in rationalizing and improving the overall economy coincided with the interests of the mercantile elements in society. Such institutions were, competitively speaking, more effective and more efficient in curtailing freeriding and defection, and hence they were better at mobilizing the resources of their societies.”
- “Moreover, because of their territorial character, states were compatible with one another. Their respective jurisdictions could be precisely specified through agreement on fixed borders. So not only could sovereigns speak on behalf of their subjects, they could also precisely specify who their subjects were. And by extension, perhaps even more importantly, borders enabled sovereigns to specify limits to their authority. City-leagues in particular were unable to do so, and hence they were difficult to incorporate in a system of states. Sovereignty, therefore, also spread by mutual recognition.”
- “Finally, institutional selection occurred by mimicry and exit. Attractive institutions were copied by political elites.6 In addition, societal actors voted with their feet. They left institutions that were less to their liking and sought entry into those that best met their interests and belief systems.”
- “Because of the predatorial nature of the international realm, all units have to be able to wage war in order to survive. Accordingly, if particular forms of organization fall by the wayside, this must be explainable by their inability to wage war as effectively as their rivals. It is simply a matter of Darwinian survival of the fittest”
- “According to this explanation, sovereign states could raise more revenue and larger concentrations of troops than their feudal predecessors. In short, efficiencies of scale made sovereign states superior in waging war.”
- “ the state surpassed city-leagues and city-states because of its command of a larger territorial space and greater population. The successful invasion by France of the Italian peninsula in 1494 is thus explained in this fashion.”
- “The traditional story that the militarily strong simply annihilated the weak does not hold. Weak individual German cities continued to operate in the international state system—as it took form after Westphalia—whereas stronger city-leagues disappeared.”
- “individuals create their own environment by preferring and tolerating only certain types of institutions. Sovereign, territorial actors had reasons to prefer similar systems of rule elsewhere. Although this process is thus less structural than Darwinian selection, the iterative choices of individuals limit the opportunities and possibilities for others. In that sense a structural situation is created as well, albeit from a more sociological perspective.
	Third, selection also occurs by deliberate mimicry and exit. Political elites copy institutional forms that they perceive as successful. At the same time, social groups switch their allegiance to those types of organization that better meet their interests.”
- “The Hansa did not manage to standardize a system of measurements. The confederated nature of the league left considerable autonomy to the towns, and they were unwilling to relinquish their authority regarding weights and measures.”
- “By then there were roughly 2,500 local and regional authorities, and although not all of these minted, the chaotic currency and money conditions continued to greatly hamper German commerce.”
- “The diversity of mints thus had two consequences. First, merchants and tax collector had to develop some way of comparing different currencies. In addition to other currencies, the Hanseatic merchant had to contend with Lübeck, Pomeranian, Prussian, and Rigan marks, Brandenburg thalers, Rhenish guilders, Flemish pounds, and English pounds sterling.45 Second, the actual value of the coin might vary depending on its regional place of origin. Different coiners used different metal contents.46 Needless to say, this lent itself to considerable abuse by the minter.”
- “ In any case, on the issue of variation in minting, the French king brought some standardization to the multitude of mints and coinage types.”“French royal justice centralized the legal system more so than the Hansa”
- “The ad hoc nature of Hanseatic revenue precluded such business certitude.64 The incidental tolls and customs, which the Hansa allowed some of its towns to raise, duplicated the very problem that feudalism had previously posed for mercantile pursuits.”
- “To sum up, the Hansa proved to be less efficient in reducing transaction costs and providing collective goods than the sovereign state. It did not manage to provide standardization of weights and measurements, enforce centralized justice, establish a general system of coinage, or establish a regular means of raising revenue for a general fund.”
- “Defection and freeriding in the Hanseatic League were driven by mutual distrust between the towns and the decentralized institutional arrangements of the Hansa. Although the league had towns, such as Lübeck, that could sometimes override collective action problems, other towns did not view Lübeck’s interests as necessarily compatible with their own”
- “In short, the king acquired public status. The Hansa, by contrast, lacked a theory legitimating sovereign power. This was partially due to the absence of clear internal hierarchy and diffuse demarcation from non-Hansa authorities.90 There simply was no clear center that could operate as a sovereign.
	There were thus specific reasons why social groups perceived that the king might have the interests of the realm at heart. The king benefited from the overall welfare of the state, whereas the leading towns of the Hansa did not necessarily gain from the overall welfare of the league. Individual towns rightly perceived that the disparate members had various interests which were not always served by the actions of the diet.”
- “n short, sovereign, territorial rulers were recognized as political entrepreneurs who had vested interests in decreasing the remnants of feudal economies. In standardizing coinage, reducing the number of weights and measures, and creating more legal certitude, they reduced transaction and information costs. The greater degree of internal hierarchy was also more suited to control freeriding and defection. This in turn affected their ability to wage war more effectively than city-leagues.”
- “nternational exchange requires a modicum of domestic stability on the part of the contracting parties and at least some expectation that each will adhere to the terms of the agreement. Internal stability is required to guarantee that the negotiating partner can indeed commit the individuals on whose behalf he or she is negotiating. The direct correlate of that condition is that the party that is committing itself to particular agreements can be expected to continue the terms of the bargain over a period of time”
- “Because the league could not control defection, it could not credibly consign itself to long-run agreements with joint gains.112 Game theory corresponds here with some of the sociological literature. Institutions originate where repetitive behavior occurs between two actors. The more this repetition occurs, the more the actors expect a typical pattern of behavior from the other. Social roles develop which signal what type of behavior one may expect. When these roles are passed on to actors not immediately involved in the initial interactions, these roles become externalized.113 Actors should, therefore, prefer those types of institutions that clearly indicate the type of behavior one might expect from that actor. In short, political elites should prefer systems of rule in their environment that can commit their members. The representatives of the Hanseatic Diet were often not able to give such guarantees.”
- “International actors determine who is to count as a legitimate international participant. The Peace of Westphalia made the territorial lords of the basically defunct Holy Roman Empire full participants in the internationa”“system.124 The ministates were acknowledged as legitimate participants in the international realm and would continue to play that role into the nineteenth century.125”
- “Externally, states could credibly commit themselves and engage in long-run iterative relations. As the advantage swung in favor of sovereign states, only similar forms of organization were recognized. Domestically, sovereigns proved to be better at reducing transaction costs and providing for collective goods. As a consequence, sovereign states eventually managed to raise more revenue than their alternatives.”
- “In short, city-states looked internally somewhat like city-leagues. There was an absence of a central actor who had incentives to further the overall interest of the city-state. The dominant town exploited the subject cities as it saw fit. Conversely, subject towns judiciously guarded their autonomy and were willing to defect from the city-state whenever the opportunity presented itself Consequently, rationalization and standardization came relatively slowly to the Italian city-states. Although such processes took a long time in France as well, there were at least political entrepreneurs who had vested interests in furthering the consolidation of a more unified national economy and social groups which benefited from the process”
- “Instead this was the result of their empowerment as equivalent actors on the international scene, because of their external similarity to sovereign, territorial states.”
- “Government was closed and operated for the benefit of the few who had consolidated their positions centuries earlier.”
- “ argue, therefore, that city-states, unlike city-leagues, were compatible with a system of sovereign states. Consequently they survived with the German principalities for many centuries after Westphalia. They acknowledged territorial delimitation of their political control and a final locus for external interactions.
	However, because of their imperfect territorial integration and absence of a fully articulated sovereign authority, they proved to be less competitive than their sovereign, territorial counterparts. Local autonomy and factional interests prevented an effective and efficient mobilization of the city-states’ resources.”
- “Sovereign states were better, in the long run, in raising more revenue and larger numbers of troops.177 War did not work as an evolutionary process that selected among types of units, but it did indicate to political elites and social groups which type of organization was the more efficient, and they subsequently adopted the most competitive institutional form.”
- “in short, those that could not make the transition to consolidated national economies—were less effective and less efficient in mobilizing resources than sovereign states.178 The ability to wage war operated as an intermediate cause of selection but was ultimately propelled by the consequences of particular institutional logics.179”
- “Selection was thus partially driven by competitive efficiency. It also advanced, however, by the process of mutual empowerment. Sovereign actors only recognized particular types of actors as legitimate players in the international system. Because the Hanseatic system of rule proved to be incompatible with that of territorially defined states, and because it was less able to credibly commit itself to international treaties, it was not considered to be a legitimate player in international relations.180 As I mentioned, it was barely recognized in the Peace of Westphalia. Yet very small entities, which were organizationally compatible with sovereign states, were considered to be legitimate. The miniature states of Germany and Italy continued in the international system until their respective unifications.”
- “Selection was thus partially driven by competitive efficiency. It also advanced, however, by the process of mutual empowerment. Sovereign actors only recognized particular types of actors as legitimate players in the international system. Because the Hanseatic system of rule proved to be incompatible with that of territorially defined states, and because it was less able to credibly commit itself to international treaties, it was not considered to be a legitimate player in international relations.180 As I mentioned, it was barely recognized in the Peace of Westphalia. Yet very small entities, which were organizationally compatible with sovereign states, were considered to be legitimate. The miniature states of Germany and Italy continued in the international system until their respective unifications.”
- “On the one hand, the emergence of sovereign states had direct consequences for the other types of institutional arrangements in the system. The system selected out those types of units that were, competitively speaking, less efficient. In other words, the competitive nature of the system determined the nature of the constitutive units. At the same time, sovereign states preferred similar modes of organization in their environment. Actors intentionally created a system of sovereign, territorial states. They preferred a system that divided the sphere of cultural and economic interaction into territorial parcels with clear hierarchical authorities.”
- “ In the first phase the variety of units form the elements of a system. Because of competitive pressure between these dislike units, and through mutual empowerment as well as individuals’ choices, the system is gradually transformed into a network of similar actors. At that point the system imposes structural limits on the type of units that are possible and will be recognized by the other actors as legitimate forms of organization in international politics. With that in mind, we might sensibly speculate on the development of the state in the futur”

### Chapter 9

(Spruyt)